1) What is SQL?
    SQL stands for Structured Query Language. 
    SQL is a standard language for storing, manipulating and retrieving data in relational databases.


2) What are the usages of SQL?
    SQL is responsible for maintaining the relational data and the data structures present in the database. 
    Some of the common usages are given below:
        To execute queries against a database
        To retrieve data from a database
        To inserts records in a database
        To updates records in a database
        To delete records from a database
        To create new databases
        To create new tables in a database
        To create views in a database
        To perform complex operations on the database.

===> ORDER OF EXECUTION IN SQL?
        FROM / JOIN --> WHERE --> GroupBy --> Having --> Select --> Distinct --> OrderBy --> Limit/Offset


3) What is the purpose of DDL Language?
    DDL stands for Data Definition Language and refers to SQL commands used to create,alter, 
    modify, and delete database structures such as tables, indexes, and views.
    EG - Create,Alter,Drop,Truncate.


4) What is the purpose of DML and TCL Language?
    DML stands for Data Manipulation Language and refers to SQL commands used to insert, update, 
    and delete data within a database 
    EG - Select, Insert,Update,Delete

    TCL stands for Transactional Control Language , They ensure data integrity and manage changes made by DML commands
    EG :
        COMMIT: To save all changes made during the current transaction.
        ROLLBACK: To undo changes made during the current transaction.
        SAVEPOINT: To create a point in a transaction to which you can later roll back.


5) What is the purpose of DCL Language?
    Data control language allows users to control access and permission management to the database.
    (E.G) grant and revoke.


6) What are tables and fields in the database?
    A table is a set of organized data in the form of rows and columns. 
    It enables users to store and display records in the structure format. 


7) What is Primary Key?
    The PRIMARY KEY constraint uniquely identifies each record in a table. 
    Primary keys must contain UNIQUE values, and cannot contain NULL values. 
    A table can have only ONE primary key.


8) What is Foriegn Key?
    A FOREIGN KEY is a field (or collection of fields) in one table, that refers
    to the PRIMARY KEY in another table. The table with the foreign key is called
    the child table, and the table with the primary key is called the referenced 
    or parent table.


9)  What is a unique key?
    A unique key is a single or combination of fields that ensure all values 
    stores in the column will be unique. It means a column cannot stores duplicate values.


10) What is the difference between a primary key and a unique key?
    Primary Key:
        The primary key act as a unique identifier for each record in the table.
        We cannot store NULL values in the primary key column.
        We cannot change or delete the primary key column values.

    Unique Key:
        The unique key is also a unique identifier for records when the primary key is not present in the table.
        We can store NULL value in the unique key column, but only one NULL is allowed.
        We can modify the unique key column values.


11) What is a Database?
    A database is an organized collection of data that is structured into tables, rows, columns, and indexes. 
    It helps the user to find the relevant information frequently.


12) What is DBMS?
    DBMS stands for Database Management System. 
    It is a software program that primarily functions as an interface between the database and the end-user.


13) Normalization Vs Denormalization?
        Normalization is about reducing redundancy and improving data integrity but can lead to more complex queries.
        Denormalization simplifies queries but at the cost of increased data redundancy and potential maintenance challenges. 


14) what is Index in sql?
    Indexes are a powerful tool used in the background of a database to speed up querying. 
    Indexes power queries by providing a method to quickly lookup the requested data.


15) What is Constraints in sql?
    In a database table, we can add rules to a column known as constraints. 
    These rules control the data that can be stored in a column.

    The constraints used in SQL are:
        *) NOT NULL : values cannot be null
        *) UNIQUE : does not allows duplicate entry
        *) PRIMARY KEY : USed as a unique iddentifier in table.
        *) FORIEGN KEY : references a row in another table
        *) CHECK : validates condition for new value
        *) DEFAULT : set default value if not passed
        *) CREATE INDEX	: used to speed up the read process.

16) Which are joins in SQL? 
    SQL joins are used to retrieve data from multiple tables into a meaningful result set.
    Joins are used to merge two tables or retrieve data from tables. It depends on the relationship between tables.

    Types:
        *) Inner Join :  Returns records that have matching values in both tables
        *) Left Join : Returns all records from the left table, and the matched records from the right table
        *) Right Join : Returns all records from the right table, and the matched records from the left table
        *) Full Join : Returns all records when there is a match in either left or right table.
        *) Self Join : A self join is a regular join, but the table is joined with itself.
        *) Cross Join : The CROSS JOIN keyword all matching records from both tables whether the other table matches or not.


17) What are the set operators in SQL?
    We use the set operators to merge data from one or more tables of the same kind.

    The set operators in SQL are categories into four different types:
        A. UNION: It combines two or more results from multiple SELECT queries into a single result set. 
                    It has a default feature to remove the duplicate rows from the tables.
        B. UNION ALL: This operator is similar to the Union operator, but it does not remove the duplicate
                    rows from the output of the SELECT statements.
        C. INTERSECT: This operator returns the common records from two or more SELECT statements. 
                    It always retrieves unique records and arranges them in ascending order by default.
        D. MINUS: This operator returns the records from the first query, which is not found in the second query.
                    It does not return duplicate values. 


18) Difference between In and Between Operator in sql?
    The BETWEEN operator is used to filter results that fall within a specified range of values such as
    numbers, dates or text while the IN operator is used to filter results based on a list of specific values.


19) What are functions and their usage in SQL?
    SQL functions are simple code snippets that are frequently used and re-used in database systems 
    for data processing and manipulation.


20) What is meant by case manipulation functions? Explains its different types in SQL.
     Case manipulation functions are part of the character functions.
        LOWER: This function is used to converts a given character into lowercase. 
        UPPER: This function is used to converts a given character into uppercase.
        iNITCAP: This function is used to converts given character values to uppercase for the initials of each word.

21) Explain character-manipulation functions? Explains its different types in SQL.
        Character-manipulation functions are used to change, extract, and alter the character string.
            A) CONCAT: This function is used to join two or more values together. It always appends the 
                        second string into the end of the first string. 
            B) SUBSTR: It is used to return the portion of the string from a specified start point to an endpoint.
            C) LENGTH: This function returns the string's length in numerical value, including the blank spaces.
            D) INSTR: This function finds the exact numeric position of a specified character or word in a given string.
            E) LPAD: It returns the padding of the left-side character value for right-justified value.
            F) RPAD: It returns the padding of the right-side character value for left-justified value.
            G) TRIM: This function is used to remove all the defined characters from the beginning, end, or both.
            H) REPLACE: This function is used to replace all occurrences of a word or portion of the string (substring)
                        with the other specified string value.


22) what is COALESCE?
        The COALESCE() function returns the first non-null value in a list.


23) What is Aggregate functions in SQL?
        The aggregate function is used to determine and calculate several values in a table and 
        return the result as a single number.

        SQL provides seven (7) aggregate functions, which are given below:
            AVG(): This function is used to returns the average value from specified columns.
            COUNT(): This function is used to returns the number of table rows, including rows with null values.
            MAX(): This function is used to returns the largest value among the group.
            MIN(): This function is used to returns the smallest value among the group.
            SUM(): This function is used to returns the total summed values(non-null) of the specified column.
            FIRST(): This function is used to returns the first value of an expression.
            LAST(): This function is used to returns the last value of an expression.


24) What is SQL Injection?
        SQL injection is a code injection technique that might destroy your database.
        SQL injection is one of the most common web hacking techniques.
        SQL injection is the placement of malicious code in SQL statements, via web page input.



25) What is a Stored Procedure?
        A stored procedure is a prepared SQL code that you can save, so the code can be reused over and over again.


26) Explain the concept of Transaction and ACID properties in Database?

    A transaction in SQL is a sequence of one or more SQL operations that are executed as a single unit of work.

    ACID stands for atomicity, consistency, isolation, Durability.

        Atomicity - each statement in a transaction (to read, write, update or delete data) is treated as a single unit.
        Consistency - ensures that transactions only make changes to tables in predefined, predictable ways.
        Isolation - when multiple users are reading and writing from the same table all at once, isolation of 
                    their transactions ensures that the concurrent transactions don't interfere with or affect one another.
        Durability - ensures that changes to your data made by successfully executed transactions will be saved, 
                    even in the event of system failure.


27) What is subquery?
        A subquery is a query nested inside another SQL query. 
        It is used to retrieve data that will be used in the main query (also known as the outer query).


28) What is view in sql?
        Views in SQL are virtual tables that are derived from one or more underlying tables. 
        They do not store data themselves but provide a way to present data in a specific format or structure.


29) VIEW VS CTE in sql?
        A view is a virtual table and that is not part of the physical schema.
        A view doesn’t store the output of a particular query — it stores the query itself.
        
        CTEs or Common Table Expressions are a special type of subquery that is declared before the main query.
        It’s like creating a named temporary table that exists only for the duration of your query.
        EG:
        WITH SalesCTE AS (
            SELECT product, SUM(sales) AS total_sales
            FROM sales_data
            GROUP BY product
        )
        SELECT * FROM SalesCTE WHERE total_sales > 1000;


29) A) What is Cursor In SQL?
        A cursor is a database object used to retrieve, manipulate, and navigate through a set of rows 
        returned by a query, one row at a time. It allows you to handle row-by-row processing.


30) What is recursive query in sql?
        A recursive query in SQL is a query that calls itself repeatedly until it reaches a termination condition.
        It is a query that continuously references a previous result until it returns an empty result.


31) what is window function in SQL?
        Window functions in SQL are powerful tools that allow you to perform calculations across
        a set of table rows that are related to the current row.
        Unlike aggregate functions, which return a single value for a group of rows, window functions
        return a value for each row within a specified window.


32) How do you handle database deadlocks in SQL? What are strategies to avoid them?
        Handling database deadlocks in SQL involves both detection and prevention strategies. 
        A deadlock occurs when two or more transactions are waiting for each other to release locks.

        Detecting Deadlocks:
            Database Monitoring Tools,Error Handling

        Avoiding Deadlocks
            Consistent Locking Order,Reduce Lock Duration,Optimize Queries,Timeout Settings


33) Impact on query Performance?
        *) Speeding Up Data Retrieval
        *) Reducing I/O Operations
        *) Improving Sort Operations
        *) Enhancing Join Performance


34) What is the difference between clustered and non clustered index?
        Clustered indexes can improve performance for queries that retrieve a large number of rows from
        the table, because the database can use the index to avoid having to scan the entire table. 
        A non-clustered index does not store the physical data of the table. Instead, it stores a 
        pointer to the actual data.



35) Operators in SQL?
        COMPARISON OPERATORS:
                =	    Equal
                <>	    Not equal to
                >	    Greater than
                >=	    Greater than or equal to
                <	    Less than
                <=	    Less than or equal to

        LOGICAL OPERATORS:
            ALL	        Return true if all comparisons are true
            AND	        Return true if both expressions are true
            ANY	        Return true if any one of the comparisons is true.
            BETWEEN	    Return true if the operand is within a range
            EXISTS	    Return true if a subquery contains any rows
            IN	        Return true if the operand is equal to one of the value in a list
            LIKE	    Return true if the operand matches a pattern
            NOT	        Reverse the result of any other Boolean operator.
            OR	        Return true if either expression is true
            SOME	    Return true if some of the expressions are true

        The IS NULL and IS NOT NULL operators:



36) Explain the Difference between DELETE and TRUNCATE in SQL?
        DELETE: This command removes rows from a table based on a specified condition. 
                You can use a WHERE clause to delete specific rows. If no condition is specified, 
                all rows will be deleted, 

        TRUNCATE: This command removes all rows from a table without logging individual row deletions. 
                It effectively resets the table to its empty state, and it cannot be used with a WHERE clause.



37) what are the different types of sql commands?
        1)Data Query Language (DQL)
            SELECT: Used to retrieve data from one or more tables.

        2)Data Definition Language (DDL)
            CREATE: Used to create new tables, views, indexes, etc.
            ALTER: Used to modify the structure of an existing database object (e.g., adding or deleting columns).
            DROP: Used to delete database objects like tables, views, or indexes.
            TRUNCATE: Used to remove all rows from a table while preserving its structure.

        3) Data Manipulation Language (DML)
            INSERT: Used to add new rows to a table.
            UPDATE: Used to modify existing rows in a table.
            DELETE: Used to remove rows from a table.

        4) Data Control Language (DCL)
            GRANT: Used to give users access privileges to database objects.
            REVOKE: Used to take away access privileges from users.

        5) Transaction Control Language (TCL)
            COMMIT: Saves all changes made in the current transaction.
            ROLLBACK: Undoes changes made in the current transaction.
            SAVEPOINT: Sets a point within a transaction to which you can later roll back


38) Explain the Difference between char and varchar
        Use CHAR for fixed-length strings to optimize performance and storage when the string
        length is consistent. 
        Use VARCHAR for variable-length strings to save space and allow for greater flexibility.


39)  what is the difference between sql and mysql
        SQL (Structured Query Language):
            A standard programming language used to manage and manipulate relational databases.
            It includes commands for querying data, updating records, and defining 
            database structures (DDL, DML, DQL, DCL).

        MySQL:
            An open-source relational database management system (RDBMS) that uses SQL as its 
            query language. It is one of the most popular databases used for web applications.


40) Explain the concept of null in sql
        NULL is a special marker used in SQL to indicate that a data value does not exist in 
        the database. It is not the same as an empty string ('') or a number with a value 
        of zero (0); it signifies that the value is unknown or missing.


41) Difference between Where and Having clause in sql

        WHERE:Used to filter records before any groupings are made. 
        It applies to individual rows in the table.

        HAVING:Used to filter records after groupings have been made. 
        It applies to the results of aggregate functions in a GROUP BY clause.


42) How do you use GroupBy and Having clause?
        The GROUP BY clause is used to group rows that have the same values in specified
        columns into summary rows. It is commonly used with aggregate functions 
        (like SUM, COUNT, AVG, etc.) to produce summary statistics.

        The HAVING clause is used to filter records after the GROUP BY operation. 
        It allows you to specify conditions on aggregate functions.


42) Difference between RANK and DENSE_RANK in sql
        
        RANK:Assigns a unique rank to each distinct row within a partition.
        If two or more rows have the same value, they receive the same rank, 
        but the next rank will skip the subsequent numbers.

        Player	    Score	rank_value
            A	    100	        1
            B	    100	        1
            C	    90	        3
            D	    80	        4

        DENSE_RANK:Similar to RANK, but it does not skip any ranks after ties. 
        If two or more rows have the same value, they receive the same rank, 
        and the next rank continues from the next sequential number.

        Player	    Score	rank_value
            A	    100	        1
            B	    100	        1
            C	    90	        2
            D	    80	        3


43) Explain difference between correalted and non corelated subqueries?

        Correlated Subqueries depend on the outer query and are executed multiple times,
        while Non-Correlated Subqueries are independent and executed just once.


44) How do you optimize sql queries?
        *) Use Proper Indexing
        *) Optimize Queries
        *) Use Joins Efficiently
        *) Limit Result Sets
        *) Avoid Subqueries When Possible
        *) Use Aggregate Functions Wisely
        *) Analyze Query Execution Plans
        *) Database Configuration
        *) Optimize Data Types
        *) Regular Maintenance


45) How do you handle deadlocks in sql
        Understand: Deadlocks happen when transactions wait on each other.
        Prevent:
            Consistent Order: Access resources in the same order.
            Short Transactions: Keep them quick.
            No User Input: Avoid pauses during transactions.
            Lower Isolation Levels: Reduce locking.
        Detect: Use your DBMS's built-in detection features.
        Handle:
            Auto Rollback: DBMS rolls back one transaction
            Retry Logic: Add retries in your app.
        Log & Analyze: Keep logs to find patterns.
        Optimize: Refactor long queries and use row-level locks.
        Test: Simulate deadlocks to check your handling.


46) what is partioning in sql
        Partitioning in SQL is a database design technique that involves dividing 
        a large table into smaller, more manageable pieces called partitions. 
        Each partition can be managed and queried independently, which can improve 
        performance and manageability.


47) How do you implement error handling in sql
        *) Using TRY...CATCH Blocks
        *) Using Exception Handling in PL/pgSQL (PostgreSQL)
        *) Using Transactions
        *) Error Codes and Messages
        *) Logging Errors


48) Explain the concept of database sharding
        Sharding involves breaking a large database into smaller, more manageable 
        pieces called "shards," each of which holds a subset of the overall data.

        Database sharding is a technique used to horizontally partition data across 
        multiple database instances or servers, allowing for improved scalability, 
        performance, and manageability.
















